>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, OCTOBER 18:
THE PRESIDENT APPEALS FOR CALM
IN THE FACE OF THE EBOLA SCARE.
GAS PRICES PLUNGE-- WE'LL TALK
TO AN EXPERT ABOUT HOW LOW THEY
COULD GO.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TRYING TO BRING NEW JOBS TO COAL
MINING COMMUNITIES 50 YEARS
AFTER L.B.J. LAUNCHED THE WAR ON
POVERTY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
DURING HIS WEEKLY RADIO ADDRESS,
PRESIDENT OBAMA OFFERED
REASSURANCES THAT EBOLA DOES NOT
POSE A MAJOR THREAT TO THE
UNITED STATES.
>> WHAT WE'RE SEEING NOW IS NOT
AN OUTBREAK OR AN EPIDEMIC OF
EBOLA IN AMERICA.
WE'RE A NATION OF MORE THAN 300
MILLION PEOPLE.
TO DATE, WE'VE SEEN THREE CASES
OF EBOLA DIAGNOSED HERE.
WE HAVE TO KEEP THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE.
AS OUR PUBLIC HEALTH EXPERTS
POINT OUT, EVERY YEAR, THOUSANDS
OF AMERICANS DIE FROM THE FLU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
ALSO ANSWERED CRITICS WHO HAVE
DEMANDED THAT HE CUT OFF ALL
TRAVEL BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES
AND THE WEST AFRICAN NATIONS,
WHERE THE DISEASE HAS ALREADY
CLAIMED AT LEAST 4,000 LIVES.
>> TRYING TO SEAL OFF AN ENTIRE
REGION OF THE WORLD, IF THAT
WERE EVEN POSSIBLE, COULD
ACTUALLY MAKE THE SITUATION
WORSE.
IT WOULD MAKE IT HARDER TO MOVE
HEALTH CARE WORKERS AND SUPPLIES
BACK AND FORTH.
EXPERIENCE SHOWS THAT IT COULD
ALSO CAUSE PEOPLE IN THE
AFFECTED REGION TO CHANGE THEIR
TRAVEL, TO EVADE SCREENING AND
MAKE THE DISEASE EVEN HARDER TO
TRACK.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT WILL TEMPORARILY STOP
FUNDING RESEARCH THAT COULD MAKE
THREE HIGHLY-INFECTIOUS
DISEASES-- MERS, SARS AND
INFLUENZA-- EVEN MORE
CONTAGIOUS.
SOME SCIENTISTS ARGUE THE
RESEARCH IS VALUABLE BECAUSE IT
COULD LEAD TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
VACCINES IF THE DISEASES
MUTATE NATURALLY.
BUT CRITICS WARN THAT THE
RESEARCH COULD BE USED BY
TERRORISTS OR OTHERS DETERMINED
TO START A PANDEMIC.
NONE OF THIS INVOLVES WORK ON
EBOLA RESEARCH.
THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT
HAS UPHELD A LAW REQUIRING TEXAS
VOTERS TO PRESENT PHOTO I.D.
WHEN THEY GO TO THE POLLS NEXT
MONTH.
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AND
CIVIL RIGHTS GROUPS HAD SOUGHT
TO HAVE THE LAW OVERTURNED.
THE SIX JUSTICES WHO UPHELD THE
TEXAS LAW OFFERED NO RATIONALE
FOR THEIR DECISION.
BUT A SIX-PAGE DISSENT, WRITTEN
BY JUSTICE RUTH BADER GINSBURG
AND SUPPORTED BY JUSTICES KAGAN
AND SOTOMAYOR, SAID THE RULING
COULD KEEP AS MANY AS 600,000
TEXANS FROM VOTING, MOST OF THEM
AFRICAN-AMERICAN OR HISPANIC.
A LAWYER FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS
HAS CALLED THOSE ESTIMATES
"PREPOSTEROUS."
EARLY VOTING IN TEXAS BEGINS
MONDAY.
THE WHITE POLICE OFFICER WHO
KILLED AN UNARMED BLACK TEEN IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, LAST AUGUST
HAS TOLD INVESTIGATORS HE WAS
PINNED IN HIS VEHICLE BY MICHAEL
BROWN AND FEARED FOR HIS LIFE.
OFFICER DARREN WILSON ALSO SAID
BROWN REACHED FOR HIS GUN DURING
THE SCUFFLE AND THAT THE GUN WAS
FIRED TWICE INSIDE THE CAR.
FORENSIC TESTS SHOWED BROWN'S
BLOOD ON THE GUN, ON THE
INTERIOR DOOR PANEL OF THE
POLICE CAR AND ON WILSON'S
UNIFORM.
ALL THIS ACCORDING TO AN
ARTICLE IN TODAY'S "NEW YORK
TIMES."
A MISSOURI GRAND JURY IS
CONSIDERING BRINGING CRIMINAL
CHARGES AGAINST WILSON.
HE SHOT BROWN SEVERAL TIMES
OUTSIDE THE VEHICLE.
THERE'S BEEN A SIGHTING OF THE
SURVIVALIST ACCUSED OF KILLING
ONE STATE TROOPER AND WOUNDING
ANOTHER IN PENNSYLVANIA.
31-YEAR-OLD ERIC FREIN
REPORTEDLY WAS SPOTTED CARRYING
A RIFLE NEAR A HIGH SCHOOL LAST
NIGHT.
FREIN HAS ELUDED POLICE FOR A
MONTH, DESPITE AN EXTENSIVE
MANHUNT.
INVESTIGATORS ALSO ARE EXAMINING
BLOOD FOUND ON THE BACK PORCHES
OF SEVERAL HOMES IN THE AREA.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE IN BERMUDA
ARE WITHOUT POWER TODAY AFTER
HURRICANE GONZALO SWEPT ACROSS
THE ISLAND LAST NIGHT, DOWNING
TREES AND BLOCKING ROADWAYS.
IT'S THE SECOND POWERFUL STORM
TO STRIKE BERMUDA IN LESS THAN A
WEEK.
POLICE HAVE REPORTED NO DEATHS
OR SERIOUS INJURIES.
OVERSEAS TODAY, CATHOLIC BISHOPS
MEETING IN VATICAN CITY
CONCLUDED THEIR TWO-WEEK SYNOD
WITHOUT APPROVING A MEASURE
SOUGHT BY THE POPE THAT WOULD
HAVE WELCOMED GAYS INTO THE
CHURCH.
ANOTHER LIBERALIZATION MEASURE,
ALLOWING DIVORCED AND CIVILLY
REMARRIED CATHOLICS TO RECEIVE
COMMUNION, ALSO WAS DEFEATED.
A DRAFT AGREEMENT SHOWING
UNPRECEDENTED OPENNESS TOWARD
GAYS AND CO-HABITATING UNMARRIED
CATHOLICS RECEIVED WIDESPREAD
COVERAGE, BUT IT WAS WATERED
DOWN THROUGHOUT THE WEEK.
AND THE WATERED-DOWN VERSION WAS
ULTIMATELY REJECTED.
AND FACEBOOK IS DEMANDING THAT
THE U.S. DRUG ENFORCEMENT
ADMINISTRATION STOP USING FAKE
PROFILE PAGES TO TRY TO HUNT
DOWN SUSPECTS.
IN A LETTER MADE PUBLIC
YESTERDAY, FACEBOOK'S CHIEF
SECURITY OFFICER SAID LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS HAVE TO
FOLLOW THE SAME RULES AS
EVERYONE ELSE AND NOT LIE ABOUT
THEIR IDENTITY.
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS SAY
THEY ARE REVIEWING THE PRACTICE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW, MORE OF
OUR CONTINUING SERIES, "THE WAR
ON ISIS," DETAILED ANALYSIS OF
THE ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORTS TO
HALT THE ADVANCE BY ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS WHO HAVE CAPTURED
LARGE PORTIONS OF SYRIA AND
IRAQ.
FOR THE LATEST, WE ARE JOINED
ONCE AGAIN TONIGHT FROM
WASHINGTON BY DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE SERVED WITH THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL UNDER PRESIDENT
BUSH AND PRESIDENT OBAMA AND IS
NOW A PARTNER WITH MANTID
INTERNATIONAL.
SO, THE IRAQI PARLIAMENT TODAY
APPROVED NOMINEES FOR THE
INTERIOR AND DEFENSE MINISTRY
POSITIONS.
SO, WHAT'S THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
THAT AND WHAT CAN BE DONE NOW
THAT THEY ARE IN PLACE?
>> WELL, IT'S VERY SIGNIFICANT.
WE'VE NOT HAD A
PARLIAMENTARY-APPROVED MINISTER
OF DEFENSE OR MINISTER OF
INTERIOR SINCE 2010.
SO, TO HAVE THE SUNNI MINISTER
OF DEFENSE AND SHI'A MINISTER OF
INTERIOR IS VERY IMPORTANT
MOVING FORWARD.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS TALKED ABOUT
GETTING AN INCLUSIVE GOVERNMENT,
AND THE HARDEST PART OF THAT WAS
THE SECURITY MINISTRY.
SO, NOW THAT WE HAVE A
PARLIAMENTARY-APPROVED MINISTER
OF DEFENSE AND MINISTER OF
INTERIOR, WE HAVE YET ANOTHER
STEP TO GO FORWARD ON REALLY
COORDINATING THE RESPONSE TO THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, WE'VE BEEN
TALKING A LOT ABOUT ISIS IN THE
CONTEXT OF SYRIA AND IRAQ.
IT SEEMS LEBANON IS STARTING TO
GET DRAGGED INTO THIS FIGHT AS
WELL.
>> WELL, THAT'S RIGHT.
THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS MADE NO
BONES ABOUT THE FACT THAT IT HAS
DESIGNS ON LEBANON, AND LEBANON
HAS A VERY FRAGILE STABILITY
FROM ITS OWN CIVIL WAR 20 YEARS
AGO.
IT'S TAKEN IN A LOT OF SYRIAN
REFUGEES WHICH HAS PUT GREAT
STRAIN ON ITS STATE, ITS
SERVICE AND ITS BALANCES.
AND AGAIN NOW YOU HAVE THE
ISLAMIC STATE PROBING THE
LEBANON BORDER, CLEARLY TRYING
TO BRING THEM INTO THIS
CONFLICT.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'RE GOING TO
PUT A MAP UP ON THE SCREEN THAT
ILLUSTRATES THAT ISIS ADVANCE
THROUGH THE ANBAR PROVINCE WEST
OF BAGHDAD DURING THE PAST SEVEN
WEEKS.
WHAT IS IMPORTANT ABOUT THE
ANBAR PROVINCE?
AND WHAT'S THE IRAQI MILITARY
DOING TO STOP ISIS THERE?
>> WELL, ANBAR'S ALWAYS BEEN
IMPORTANT.
IT'S A VERY LARGE PROVINCE IN
THE WEST OF IRAQ AND IT BORDERS
A NUMBER OF OTHER PROVINCES.
IT BORDERS BAGHDAD, MOST
NOTABLY, BUT ALSO BABEL,
KERBALA, NAJAF.
IT'S A VERY SIGNIFICANT, VERY
LARGE PROVINCE, AND ISIS FIRST
MOVED HERE IN JANUARY, LONG
BEFORE ITS SWEEP INTO MOSUL THAT
GARNERED EVERYONE'S ATTENTION.
SO, ISIS HAS BEEN HERE A LONG
TIME.
AND IN FACT, SOME WOULD SAY ISIS
REALLY NEVER LEFT, THAT EVEN
WHEN THE FORMER A.Q.I., NOW
ISIS, THE FORMER AL QAEDA IN
IRAQ, WENT TO GROUND, IT NEVER
REALLY LEFT ANBAR AND ALWAYS HAD
A FOOTHOLD THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THEY ALSO
CONTROL A TOWN JUST ABOUT 12
MILES WEST OF THE BAGHDAD
AIRPORT, AND THEY'VE BEEN ABLE
TO FIRE MORTARS INTO THE GREEN
ZONE ON THE EASTERN SIDE OF
BAGHDAD, WHERE THE U.S. EMBASSY
IS.
HOW SAFE IS BAGHDAD NOW FROM
ISIS?
>> WELL, IN THE MEGA-PICTURE,
BAGHDAD IS NOT GOING TO FALL TO
THE ISLAMIC STATE LIKE MOSUL
DID.
THAT'S SIMPLY NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN.
BAGHDAD IS A MAJORITY SHI'A CITY
THAT IS JUST-- WHOSE CITIZENS
FIND ISIS TO BE ABSOLUTELY
ANATHEMA AND IT WILL NOT BE
WELCOMED IN ANY WAY, SHAPE OR
FORM.
NOW, THAT SAID, ISIS DOES HAVE
SANCTUARY IN AND AROUND BAGHDAD
AND CAN DO HARRASING ATTACKS.
WHAT EVERYONE IS MOST CONCERNED
ABOUT, OF COURSE, IS THE BAGHDAD
AIRPORT.
THE WESTERN EDGE OF THE BAGHDAD
AIRPORT IS JUST A FEW KILOMETERS
FROM ANBAR PROVINCE, AND IT IS
NOT INCONCEIVABLE THAT ISIS IS
TRYING TO NOT CAPTURE BUT
INTERDICT THE BAGHDAD AIRPORT.
YOU PUT ONE OR TWO ARTILLERY
ROUNDS ON THE RUNWAY AT BAGHDAD
AIRPORT, AND ALL OF A SUDDEN,
INTERNATIONAL AIR TRAVEL SHUTS
DOWN FOR THAT CITY, WHICH WOULD
THEN SEND INTO A TIZZY THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY THAT'S
IN BAGHDAD, ALL THE EMBASSIES,
ALL THE MILITARY ASSISTANCE, ET
CETERA.
SO, THAT'S A VERY REAL PROBLEM
THAT WE'RE WATCHING.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT WITH MANTID
INTERNATIONAL, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, AN OFTEN LESS VISIBLE
ASPECT OF POVERTY IN AMERICA--
RURAL POVERTY.
OF THE ESTIMATED 45 MILLION
AMERICANS NOW LIVING BELOW THE
POVERTY LINE, MORE THAN 7.5
MILLION LIVE IN RURAL AREAS.
EASTERN KENTUCKY, COAL MINING
COUNTRY, IS ONE AREA WHERE
POVERTY HAS PERSISTED THROUGHOUT
THE YEARS.
NOW, A NEW GOVERNMENT PLAN-- THE
CREATION OF WHAT ARE KNOWN AS
PROMISE ZONES-- AIMS TO
ALLEVIATE IT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
TRAVELED THERE RECENTLY AND HAS
OUR REPORT.
IT'S PART OF OUR SERIES,
"POVERTY: THE 50-YEAR WAR."
>> Nasrrator: IN THIS SOUTH
CENTRAL MOUNTAIN COUNTRY, OVER A
THIRD OF THE POPULATION HAS
FACED CHRONIC UNEMPLOYMENT.
>> Reporter: FOR AS LONG AS
ANYONE CAN REMEMBER, THE COAL
COUNTRY OF EASTERN KENTUCKY HAS
STRUGGLED.
IN 1964, PRESIDENT LYNDON
JOHNSON CAME THROUGH HERE AFTER
HE DECLARED THE WAR ON POVERTY.
THIS IS THE AREA THAT BECAME THE
FACE OF HIS CAMPAIGN.
>> AND WE ARE JUST NOT WILLING
TO ACCEPT THE NECESSITY OF
POVERTY.
>> Reporter: BACK THEN, THE
POVERTY RATE IN SOME AREAS WAS
AROUND 60%.
EASTERN KENTUCKY HAS MADE BIG
STRIDES IN THE 50 YEARS SINCE
LYNDON JOHNSON CAME THROUGH
HERE, BUT EVEN STILL THE AREA
CONTINUES TO STRUGGLE TODAY.
THE POVERTY RATE IN EASTERN
KENTUCKY HAS DROPPED, BUT IN
SOME PARTS STILL HOVERS AROUND
30%.
UNEMPLOYMENT IN SOME COUNTIES IS
MORE THAN 10%, MUCH HIGHER THAN
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
AND THE REGION IS STILL
DEPENDENT ON COAL, WHICH HAS
MEANT TROUBLE AS THE INDUSTRY'S
GONE SOUTH.
HOW BIG IS THE COAL INDUSTRY?
>> EVERYTHING HERE STEMS OFF OF
COAL.
>> Reporter: LIKE MANY HERE,
TOBEY MILLER'S ROOTS RUN DEEP,
AND THEY RUN THROUGH THE COAL
MINES.
>> WELL, MY PAPAW, HE WORKED IN
THE MINES, USED TO TELL ME
STORIES ABOUT WHEN HE MOVED
HERE.
>> Reporter: MILLER'S PAPAW, HIS
GRANDFATHER, BOUGHT THE FAMILY
FARM IN KNOX COUNTY IN 1941 WITH
THE MONEY HE EARNED FROM COAL.
MILLER'S DAD WORKED IN COAL.
AND STRAIGHT OUT OF HIGH SCHOOL,
MILLER DID, TOO, WELDING THE
HEAVY MACHINERY USED IN THE
MINES.
MILLER'S FAMILY-- HIS WIFE, TWO
DAUGHTERS AND GRANDDAUGHTER--
LIVED WELL.
HE EARNED MORE THAN $50,000 A
YEAR.
THAT'S DOUBLE THE MEDIAN
HOUSEHOLD INCOME AROUND HERE.
BUT THEN, A YEAR AGO, MILLER WAS
TOLD HIS JOB WAS BEING CUT.
>> I'VE GOT KIDS THAT HAVE NEEDS
THAT I COULDN'T PROVIDE FOR.
I GUESS, ACTUALLY, I GOT
DEPRESSED REAL, REAL BAD, AND
I... I JUST... I WAS JUST SCARED
OF LOSING EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: MILLER SAYS HIS
FAMILY'S FARM HAS HELPED HIM GET
BY.
HE GROWS MOST OF HIS OWN FOOD
AND ALREADY CHOPPED FIREWOOD FOR
WINTER.
>> THAT'LL BE MY HEAT.
>> Reporter: AFTER HIS
UNEMPLOYMENT CHECKS RAN OUT, HE
DID ODD JOBS FOR NEIGHBORS TO
STAY AFLOAT.
>> YOU JUST CAN'T GO OUT HERE
AND FIND A JOB THAT SUITS YOU.
I MEAN, IT JUST AIN'T HERE.
>> Reporter: SINCE THE 1970s,
MORE THAN 130,000 COAL JOBS HAVE
BEEN LOST IN THE U.S., A DECLINE
OF ABOUT 50%.
COAL EMPLOYMENT IN EASTERN
KENTUCKY'S NOW AT A HISTORIC
LOW.
MORE THAN 7,000 JOBS HAVE BEEN
LOST SINCE 2008.
>> THE THING THAT HASN'T
HAPPENED AT AN ADEQUATE RATE IS
THE DIVERSIFICATION OF THE LOCAL
ECONOMY.
>> Reporter: UNIVERSITY OF
KENTUCKY ECONOMIST AND POVERTY
EXPERT JAMES ZILIAK SAYS A
VICIOUS CYCLE IS AT WORK.
LIKE OTHER PERSISTENTLY POOR
AREAS, EASTERN KENTUCKY'S HIGH
SCHOOL AND COLLEGE GRADUATION
RATES ARE LOWER THAN THE REST OF
THE COUNTRY.
SO, FEW OTHER INDUSTRIES
INCREASINGLY IN NEED OF HIGHLY
SKILLED WORKERS HAVE LOCATED
HERE.
>> I THINK THE RECOGNITION HAS
COME AT THIS POINT IN TIME THAT
COAL, IT'S NOT GOING TO BE THE
ENGINE OF JOB GROWTH GOING
FORWARD.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE MANY
REASONS FOR COAL'S LONG
DECLINE--INCREASED
MECHANIZATION, A DWINDLING COAL
SUPPLY, THE LOW COST OF NATURAL
GAS AND STRICTER ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATIONS.
>> WHILE THE E.P.A. AND
BUREAUCRATS TRY TO KILL
KENTUCKY'S COAL INDUSTRY...
>> Reporter: THE JOB LOSSES ARE
A HOT TOPIC IN THE SENATE RACE
HERE.
REPUBLICAN INCUMBENT MITCH
McCONNELL HAS TRIED TO
CAPITALIZE ON THE LATEST ROUND
OF ENVIRONMENTAL RULES PROPOSED
BY THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION LAST
SUMMER.
EVEN DEMOCRATIC CHALLENGER
ALISON LUNDERGAN GRIMES HAS KEPT
HER DISTANCE FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION.
>> I DON'T AGREE WITH WHAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS DONE, HIS ENERGY
PHILOSOPHY.
>> Reporter: WHILE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S BLAMED, RIGHT OR WRONG,
FOR THE COAL LAYOFFS IN
KENTUCKY, HE'S ALSO GETTING SOME
CREDIT FOR A NEW PLAN TO BOOST
THE ECONOMY, UNVEILED EARLIER
THIS YEAR.
>> WE'RE HERE TODAY TO ANNOUNCE
THE FIRST FIVE PROMISE ZONES IN
AMERICA.
>> Reporter: THE PROMISE ZONE
INITIATIVE WILL FIGHT POVERTY BY
CONCENTRATING AID IN SPECIFIC
REGIONS OF THE U.S.
IT'S NOT A NEW IDEA.
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN AND
HOUSING SECRETARY JACK KEMP
PUSHED ENTERPRISE ZONES STARTING
IN THE '80s.
PRESIDENT CLINTON PROMOTED
EMPOWERMENT ZONES.
THEY APPEAL TO THE LEFT AND
THE RIGHT BECAUSE THEY USE TAX
BREAKS TO SPUR JOB GROWTH.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PROPOSED TAX
CUTS FOR THE PROMISE ZONES, BUT
THEY HAVE TO BE PASSED BY
CONGRESS, A PROSPECT CONSIDERED
UNLIKELY FOR NOW.
AND THERE'S NO GUARANTEED
FEDERAL AID, JUST A PROMISE OF
PRIORITY FOR FEDERAL GRANTS.
THE PROMISE ZONE IN KENTUCKY
INCLUDES PARTS OF EIGHT COUNTIES
IN THE SOUTHEAST PART OF THE
STATE WHERE TOBEY MILLER LIVES.
JERRY RICKETT LED THE EFFORT TO
APPLY FOR THE PROMISE ZONE
DESIGNATION.
IT'S NO SECRET THAT THIS PART OF
THE COUNTRY HAS BEEN STRUGGLING
WITH A LOT OF THESE ISSUES FOR
MANY YEARS.
WHAT IS IT ABOUT THIS PROMISE
ZONE THAT YOU THINK IS GOING TO
ACTUALLY MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
>> I THINK IT GETS BACK TO THE
PARTNERS ALL PULLING TOGETHER.
YOU KNOW, ONE INDIVIDUAL GROUP
CAN ONLY DO SO MUCH, BUT IF YOU
WEAVE US TOGETHER INTO A ROPE,
WE CAN BE REALLY, REALLY STRONG.
>> THE PEOPLE OF THE REGION HAVE
SAID, THIS IS IT.
WE'VE GOT TO DO SOMETHING NOW OR
ELSE WE MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO
PULL BACK.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THE
PROMISE ZONE HAS BROUGHT
TOGETHER A NEW COALITION OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, SCHOOLS AND
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS THAT
WILL IMPLEMENT THE PROMISE ZONE
GOALS: DIVERSIFYING THE ECONOMY,
CREATING JOBS, GROWING SMALL
BUSINESS, AND IMPROVING
EDUCATION AND RETRAINING.
THE WORK IS JUST GETTING UNDER
WAY, BUT RICKETT POINTS TO A
COUPLE SUCCESSFUL LOCAL
INITIATIVES THAT SHOW HOW THE
PROMISE ZONE COULD WORK.
>> WE'VE GOT TO GET A BETTER-
EDUCATED WORKFORCE, GOT TO HELP
THE ADULTS THAT, YOU KNOW, NEED
ADDITIONAL TRAINING OR
RETRAINING.
>> Reporter: ESPECIALLY
UNEMPLOYED COAL MINERS.
MANY ARE LEAVING IN DROVES TO
FIND WORK.
SO, IN HAZARD, KENTUCKY, TWO
PROMISE ZONE PARTNERS-- THE
COMMUNITY COLLEGE AND A JOB-
TRAINING GROUP-- LAUNCHED A NEW
PROGRAM TO TEACH LAID-OFF MINERS
TO REPAIR ELECTRICITY AND PHONE
LINES.
SO FAR, 39 HAVE GRADUATED AND
ALMOST EVERY ONE HAS FOUND A
JOB.
TOBEY MILLER IS ALSO RETRAINING.
AT HIS NEARBY COMMUNITY COLLEGE,
HE'S EARNING AN ASSOCIATE'S
DEGREE TO REPAIR HEATING, AIR
CONDITIONING AND VENTILATION
SYSTEMS, OR H.V.A.C.
>> IF I CAN, I'M GOING TO STAY
RIGHT HERE AND TRY TO GET
THROUGH THIS SCHOOL THAT I'M
DOING, BECAUSE IT'S HERE.
H.V.A.C. WORK IS HERE.
>> Reporter: MILLER SAYS HE
WANTS TO START HIS OWN BUSINESS
ONE DAY.
PROMISE ZONE SUPPORTERS SAY
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT THEY WANT,
TOO.
>> WE REALLY BELIEVE IN
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, TRYING TO GET
BUSINESSES TO START, TRYING TO
FIND WAYS TO HELP THE ONES THAT
ARE HERE, YOU KNOW, THRIVE.
IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT TO RECRUIT
INDUSTRIES INTO EASTERN
KENTUCKY.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE IT'S SO
DIFFICULT TO RECRUIT OUTSIDE
EMPLOYERS, RICKETT SAYS THEY
NEED TO GROW THEIR OWN.
LAST YEAR, RICKETT'S GROUP GOT
AN $800,000 FEDERAL GRANT, WHICH
IT THEN LOANED TO LOCAL
MANUFACTURER CLYDE PHILLIPS.
HE HIRED 19 PEOPLE WITH THAT
MONEY AND PLANS TO HIRE DOZENS
MORE.
WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE LOSING THEIR
JOBS AND THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
ALREADY UN... UNEMPLOYED, WILL
ONE OR TWO JOBS HERE OR A DOZEN
JOBS THERE MAKE THAT DIFFERENCE?
>> WELL, IT'S THE ONLY OP...
OPPORTUNITY WE HAVE.
YOU HAVE TO BE REALISTIC AND
WORK WITHIN THE AREAS THAT YOU
CAN AND HAVE PROGRESS AND
SUCCESS IN.
>> I DO GET THE SENSE THAT
THERE'S GREATER ENERGY AND
ENTHUSIASM TO... TO... TO TACKLE
THE PROBLEM.
BUT TIME WILL TELL WHETHER OR
NOT IT WILL ULTIMATELY PAY OFF.
CLEARLY, WE'RE HOPING THAT IT
DOES.
>> I'VE NEVER DEPENDEND ON
THAT BEFORE.
>> Reporter: LIKE MANY OTHERS
HERE, TOBEY MILLER BLAMES THE
GOVERNMENT FOR THE COAL LAYOFFS
BUT ADMITS HE'S BEEN HELPED BY
FEDERAL PROGRAMS, TOO.
A LOCAL PROMISE ZONE PARTNER
SIGNED HIM UP FOR FEDERALLY-
SUPPORTED PROGRAMS THAT HAVE
HELPED PAY HIS MORTGAGE AND
PROVIDE A STIPEND FOR A FEW
MONTHS.
>> IT HAS BEEN A VERY BIG BONUS
FOR ME.
I MEAN, IT SAVED MY BACON.
BUT THE PROBLEM I HAVE WITH IT
IS, IF THEY'D LEFT THINGS ALONE,
EVERYTHING WOULD'VE STILL BEEN
GOING ALONG JUST FINE.
>> Reporter: MILLER SAYS HIS
DREAM IS TO SAVE ENOUGH MONEY TO
SEND HIS YOUNGEST DAUGHTER TO A
FOUR-YEAR COLLEGE.
SHE'D BE THE FIRST IN THE FAMILY
TO GO.
>> Sreenivasan: TO LEARN MORE
ABOUT THE GROWING RATE OF
POVERTY IN AMERICA'S SUBURBS,
VISIT www.newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: AS YOU NO DOUBT
KNOW, GAS PRICES HAVE FALLEN
SHARPLY IN RECENT WEEKS.
ACCORDING TO A.A.A., THE AVERAGE
PRICE OF A GALLON OF REGULAR WAS
$3.52 IN LATE JULY.
NOW, LESS THAN THREE MONTHS
LATER, IT'S $3.12.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED NOW BY
ISAAC ARNSDORF.
HE IS AN ENERGY AND COMMODITIES
REPORTER WITH BLOOMBERG NEWS.
SO WE'VE SEEN IT DECLINE A LOT
AND SOMETIMES THERE'S A LAG
BETWEEN THE PRICE OF OIL AND THE
PRICE OF GAS.
ARE WE LIKELY TO SEE THE PRICE
OF GAS GO LOWER?
>> IT COULD CONTINUE TO TICK
DOWN A LITTLE BIT.
WE ARE SEEING OIL PRICES START
TO STABILIZE SIGNIFICANTLY
LOWER THAN THEY WERE THIS
SUMMER, BUT IT DEPENDS SORT OF
WHERE OIL GOES FROM NOW.
IF OIL CONTINUES ITS FREEFALL,
REALLY, OR FINDS A FLOOR AROUND
$80 A BARREL.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT LIKELY
TO LAST?
THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT
FACTORS THAT ARE PUSHING IT
DOWN.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WE'VE GOT VERY SOFT DEMAND
GLOBALLY, AND EXPANDING SUPPLY
FROM THE U.S., AND REALLY ALL
EYES ARE ON OPEC NOW TO SEE IF
THEY CUT BACK SUPPLY OR CONTINUE
TO ADD SUPPLY AND LET PRICES
CONTINUE TO FALL.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THERE WERE
SOME COMMENTS MADE BY THE I.M.F.
IN SAUDI ARABIA EARLIER THIS
WEEK ABOUT WHAT'S GOOD AND
WHAT'S BAD FOR SAUDI ARABIA,
"WHAT'S THAT PRICE POINT."
WHAT'S THAT ALL ABOUT?
>> THE I.M.F. ESTIMATES SAUDI
ARABIA NEEDS ABOUT $83 A BARREL
TO BREAK EVEN ON ITS BUDGET.
BUT SAUDI ARABIA HAS A LOT OF
CURRENCY RESERVES AND VERY GOOD
CREDIT.
THEY'VE RUN DEFICITS BEFORE AND
THEY COULD WITHSTAND IT FOR SOME
TIME.
SO, LOWER PRICES, WHILE IT WOULD
REDUCE SAUDI ARABIA'S INCOME, IT
WOULD ACTUALLY PROBABLY HURT
SOME OF THEIR BIG RIVALS MORE
LIKE IRAN OR RUSSIA.
SO, YOU KNOW, THERE'S-- ANALYSTS
ARE SORT OF SPLIT.
IS OPEC JUST NOT HANGING
TOGETHER OR IS THERE A CAMP THAT
THINKS MAYBE SAUDI ARABIA IS ALL
RIGHT WITH THE PRICES BEING
LOWER?
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
UPSIDE HERE?
WHEN PRICES FALL AT THE PUMP,
CONSUMERS IN THE THE UNITED
STATES ACTUALLY FEEL BETTER
ABOUT IT BECAUSE THEY'RE PAYING
LESS AT THE GAS STATION, BUT
WHAT ARE KIND OF THE ECONOMIC
RIPPLE EFFECTS WHEN THERE ARE
LOW GAS PRICES?
>> ABSOLUELY.
THIS IS ABOUT THE EQUIVALENT OF
A $500 OR $600 TAX CUT FOR EVERY
HOUSEHOLD, AND THAT'S MONEY THAT
IS PROBABLY GOING TO GET SPENT
BASICALLY RIGHT AWAY BECAUSE SO
MANY AMERICANS LIVE PAYCHECK TO
PAYCHECK AND SPEND EVERYTHING IN
THEIR POCKET, SO ANYTHING THAT
THEY'RE SAVING ON FUEL, THAT'S
MONEY THAT'S GOING TO GO RIGHT
INTO THE ECONOMY AND INTO
CONSUMER SPENDING.
AND THAT WILL HAPPEN PRETTY
QUICKLY, AND THE ECONOMIC
EFFECT OF THAT COULD BE ABOUT
.4% OF G.D.P. GROWTH.
>> Sreenivasan: WOW.
HOW DOES THAT RIPPLE INTO, FOR
EXAMPLE, THE HOLIDAY SHOPPING
SEASON OR IS THAT MORE MONEY IN
THE POCKET WE CAN START SPENDING
ON TOYS AND GIFTS, ET CETERA, ET
CETERA?
>> THE OTHER INTERESTING THING
ABOUT GAS PRICES IS, IT'S OFTEN
BEEN NOTED THAT IT'S REALLY
PECULIAR, THE WAY WE BUY IT.
WE SIT THERE AND WATCH THE
DOLLARS ROLL BY.
EVEN MORE THAN THE THE ACTUAL
EFFECT ON INCOME IS THIS
PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECT ON CONSUMER
CONFIDENCE BECAUSE WE REALLY
NOTICE WHEN THOSE PRICES MOVE
AROUND AS WE WATCH THEM GO BY.
>> Sreenivasan: TO RECAP, THE
BIG REASONS ARE THAT CHINA IS
PERHAPS DEMANDING LESS OIL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND AT THE
SAME TIME THE U.S. IS CREATING
MORE NATURAL GAS AND OIL
RESERVES?
>> YEAH, SO THE U.S. IS
PRODUCING A LOT MORE OIL
DOMESTICALLY, IMPORTING A LOT
LESS, WHICH MAKES A LOT MORE OIL
AVAILABLE ON THE WORLD MARKET TO
GO TO ASIA.
BUT CHINA IS NOT-- THE GROWTH IS
SLOWING DOWN THERE.
ALSO, IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES,
CARS ARE GETTING MORE EFFICIENT
AND PEOPLE ARE DRIVING LESS.
SO DEMAND GLOBALLY IS GROWING AT
THE SLOWEST PACE SINCE 2009, AND
2009 WAS, OBVIOUSLY, A VERY WEAK
YEAR.
AND AT THE SAME TIME THERE IS
ALL THIS SUPPLY COMING ON FROM
THE U.S. AND ELSEWHERE, SO
THAT'S WHY WE'VE SEEN PRICES
TAKE SUCH A NOSEDIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, ISAAC
ARNSDORF FROM BLOOMBERG NEWS.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MUSIC FANS HAVE
LONG DEBATED THE MEANING OF THIS
PHOTOGRAPH, THE COVER OF THE
1969 ICONIC BEATLES ALBUM,
"ABBEY ROAD."
THAT IMAGE WAS ACTUALLY ONE OF
SEVERAL TAKEN DURING A PHOTO
SHOOT WITH THE FAB FOUR.
NOW, 45 YEARS LATER, ALL THE
PHOTOS SNAPPED THAT DAY ARE
GOING UP FOR AUCTION.
>> Reporter: THE PHOTOGRAPHER
ONLY HAD TEN MINUTES, SO HE GOT
THE BAND TO CROSS THE ROAD A FEW
TIMES, TOOK SIX SNAPS, AND THEN
PAUL McCARTNEY CHOSE THE ONE
THAT ENDED UP ON THE ALBUM
COVER.
♪
NOW, FOR WHAT'S THOUGHT TO BE
THE FIRST TIME, ALL SIX IMAGES
TAKEN BY IAIN MACMILLAN AND ONE
USED ON THE BACK OF THE "ABBEY
ROAD" ALBUM ARE BEING SOLD
TOGETHER.
>> THE COLLECTOR HAS BEEN
COLLECTING MUSIC PHOTOGRAPHY FOR
OVER 15 YEARS, AND IT TOOK HIM
TEN YEARS TO FIND IT.
SO, IT'S REALLY SPECIAL.
>> Reporter: WHAT FEW KNEW AT
THE TIME WAS THAT "ABBEY ROAD,"
RELEASED IN 1969, WOULD BE THE
LAST TIME THE BEATLES RECORDED
TOGETHER.
IT LEAD LATER TO CONSPIRACY
THEORIES, THAT THE SCENE ON THE
COVER SYMBOLIZED A FUNERAL
PROCESSION, EVEN THAT PAUL
McCARTNEY HAD DIED AND AN
IMPOSTER WAS USED.
THE COVER BECAME AN ICON IN ITS
OWN RIGHT.
JOHN LENNON'S SUIT WAS AUCTIONED
OFF FOR A SMALL FORTUNE.
SO, TOO, WAS THE WHITE CAR-- THE
FIFTH "BEATLE" IN THE IMAGE--
WHICH IS NOW ON DISPLAY IN
GERMANY'S VOLKSWAGEN MUSEUM.
WITH AN ESTIMATED 200,000
TOURISTS VISITING THIS CROSSING
EVERY YEAR AND, OF COURSE, ALL
OF THE LONDON TRAFFIC, FINDING A
QUIET TEN MINUTES TO TAKE THOSE
PICTURES THESE DAYS WOULD BE A
VIRTUAL IMPOSSIBILITY.
IT DOESN'T STOP FANS TRYING TO
CAPTURE THE MOMENT.
SOME WITH THEIR OWN UNIQUE
TWIST.
EVEN THE OUTTAKES ARE PRODUCING
HUGE INTEREST, ESPECIALLY AS
JUST MONTHS AFTER THESE IMAGES
WERE TAKEN, THE BEATLES WOULD BE
WALKING AWAY FOR GOOD WHEN THEY
SPLIT UP.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE
NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU
TONIGHT.
THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT IS
SHIPPING 800 VIALS OF ITS
EXPERIMENTAL EBOLA VACCINE TO
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
WHICH WILL DISTRIBUTE IT IN
AFRICAN NATIONS RAVAGED BY THE
DISEASE.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.